---
title: "Introduction"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is static web content?"
- "Why should I use GitHub or GitLab Pages to create my website?"
objectives:
- "explain what a static site generator does."
- "choose the appropriate tool for their website/project."
keypoints:
- "A static site generator combines page-specific content with layout elements and styling information to construct individual webpages."
- "GitHub/GitLab Pages is a good choice for people who are already familiar with Git and GitHub/GitLab."
- "This approach can be used to create a relatively small website/blog on a limited budget."
---

When we use a web browser to visit a page on the World-Wide Web,
the browser asks for information from a server -
a computer storing the data relevant to the site and configured to receive and respond to requests for that data.
Assuming there were no problems at this stage
(e.g. asking for a page which doesn't exist, or being unable to reach the server),
our browser receives and interprets this information
to render and display the webpage on our screen.
(A web developer would probably be horrified to read such a gross oversimplification,
which is just one reason why
web developers are not the target audience of this tutorial.)

The page displayed by the web browser is the result of combining
**HTML** - a hierarchical format describing the structural elements of the page and their raw content - with
**CSS** - an ordered set of styling instructions telling the browser how the content should be organised and formatted -
and any **images** that should be embedded in the page.
Other information received from the server,
but not displayed by the browser,
includes **metadata** and other non-visible elements in the HTML -
information about the site that could be relevant for a computer
but probably isn't interesting to a human
(there are [exceptions][qwantz-easter-egg-ext] to this) -
and scripts that the browser may run to do something
in response to various triggers.

> ## Writing Basic HTML
>
> TODO: brief overview of tags,
> including strong, heading, and link.
> Fill-in-the-blanks exercise to write HTML to recreate some example text.
{: .challenge }

## Hello world in HTML

When learning a new programming language,
you may often find a references to the popular `Hello world`.
These examples typically capture the simplest code that
can produce and display the `Hello world` on screen.

As HTML requires certain tags to be present and almost always in matching pairs (open `<tag>` and closing `</tag>`).
HTML documents tend to be get verbose rather quickly.

The simplest, valid HTML `Hello world` is:

```html
<html>
  <head>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Hello World<p>
  </body>
</html>
```

So as you can imagine, writing long HTML documents by hand is rather painful.
Notice that we didn't specify anything about how and where the text should be displayed.
To achieve this we would additionally need to include CSS instructions.

Sites consisting of pages whose content doesn't change
after that initial information is received by the server
are referred to as _static_.
Conversely, sites whose pages can be updated after loading,
with information continuing to be passed between browser and server,
are called _dynamic_.
This lesson focuses on static sites and tools that can be used to create them,
known as **Static Site Generators**.

![Pages can be created by static server-side generation, where HTML is generated once on the server and doesn't change thereafter, by dynamic server-side generation, where the server can update and send new HTML based on requests from the browser, and client-side generation, where HTML is generated by the browser itself by processing source data from the server(s) with previously-loaded Javascript code.](/fig/page-generation-js4ds.svg)
_Figure 1.1: Page Generation Alternatives. This figure was originally published in [JavaScript for Data Science][js4ds], and is reproduced here with permission from the original author._

Static-generated sites are a great choice when the information you want to
display on a website is the same regardless of who visits your site
and when they visit,
and when it's unlikely to need to change very often.
This makes Static Site Generators a good choice for sites that provide
documentation or lesson content like this page:
the aim of the page is to deliver the same information,
and the visitor arrives,
(hopefully) finds and reads what they need,
and leaves feeling happy and fulfilled.
Dynamic sites provide a lot more possibilities for providing interactivity and
personalised or topical content.
But creating them is a degree more complicated
and also places considerable additional burden on the server,
not least in terms of computational requirements and security considerations.
Among other things this means that,
unlike with static pages (see the rest of this lesson),
you're unlikely to find cost-free platforms to help you deliver dynamic content.

One of the advantages of using static site generators is that
they remove the need for us to manually produce a lot of HTML,
allowing us to focus on the human-readable content we want our pages to contain.
However, we still need a way to tell the generator how we want our content
to look when it's displayed in the browser.
For that, we will use a tool called Markdown.

> ## The perfect tool for the job
>
> Given the following types of websites,
> reason if a static site generator is an appropriate solution to implement them.
>
> 1. A personal website with *About* and *Projects* sections
> 2. A forum or discussion platform
> 3. A community blog or news website
> 4. A search engine (such as google.com)
> 5. A wiki (such as wikipedia.com)
> 6. An online book
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. In most cases, **Yes**. This kind of content is typically written/edited by one person and meant to have a read-only access to visitors.
> > 2. Most likely **No**. Such website requires interactivity and ways to identify who wrote what content.
> >
> > For questions 3 and 5 the answer is both **Yes** and **No** depending on the requirements and necessary functionality.
> >
> > 3. A simple blog or news website, maintained by a small set of users, is perfectly achievable by using a static generator. For very large groups of content creators or if access to articles needs to be controlled individually, using a static generator will lead to difficult technical challenges.
> > 4. Most often **No**. Implementing something as sophisticated as Google's search would be close to impossible with a static generator. There are ways to have a simple engine that searches across all pages produced by a static generator using indexing and making clever use of browser features but this approach has many limitations.
> > 5. A simple wiki is perfectly doable with a static generator (e.g. [GitHub Wiki Pages](https://guides.github.com/features/wikis/)), however it becomes limiting as soon as its content needs to be edited or discussed by many users, as is the case of Wikipedia.
> > 6. Definitely **Yes**. Static generators are perfect for this type of website. They typically provide ways to avoid repeating content (variables and templates), automatic creation of a *Table Of Contents*, among other goodies.
> {: .solution }
{: .challenge }

[qwantz-easter-egg-ext]: https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/dinosaur-comics-easter-eg/bojkkeeefjmeogpgnlomodfkkfkfhabj

{% include links.md %}
